\input texinfo   @c -*-texinfo-*-
@c %**start of header
@setfilename dtrt-indent.info
@settitle dtrt-indent.el 0.2.0
@c %**end of header

@copying
This manual is for dtrt-indent, version 0.2.0.

Copyright @copyright{} 2003, 2007, 2008 Julian Scheid

@quotation
Permission is granted to ...
@end quotation
@end copying

@titlepage
@title dtrt-indent
@subtitle User Manual
@author Julian Scheid

@c  The following two commands
@c  start the copyright page.
@page
@vskip 0pt plus 1filll
@insertcopying

Published by ...
@end titlepage

@c So the toc is printed at the start.
@contents

@ifnottex
@node Top
@top dtrt-indent

This is the user manual for dtrt-indent, version 0.2.0.
@end ifnottex

@menu
* Introduction::    What dtrt-indent is about
* Usage::           Basic usage information
* Heuristics::      Details on dtrt-indent's inner workings
* Diagnosis::       How to reveal dtrt-indent's inner workings
* Configuration::   How to fine-tune dtrt-indent
* Copying::         dtrt-indent is distributed under GPL v2
@end menu

@node Introduction
@chapter Introduction

@section Motivation

Today, open source is omnipresent and programmers will often find
themselves editing other people's code.  Different people prefer
different kinds of indentation - there are arguments for using 2 or 8
spaces per level (and anything in between) and for using ``hard'' or
``soft'' tabs.

This usually isn't a problem when viewing other people's code, but
when editing it you'll find that it is very annoying if your editor
settings don't match the ones used for creating the file in question.

Here's an example: suppose you are editing a C file that was created
with 3 spaces per level but your @code{c-basic-offset} is set to 4.
You'll end up with something like this:

@verbatim
int main()
{
   printf(``hello\n'');
    exit(10);
//  ^ indented at 4 spaces instead of 3
}
@end verbatim

That's where @command{dtrt-indent} comes in: when you open a file, it
will perform a quick analysis of the file's indentation and will make
an educated guess on the indentation offset and the tab setting used
for creating the file.  If the guess is deemed reliable, the
appropriate settings will be transparently adjusted; otherwise, they
will be left alone.

@command{dtrt-indent} errs on the side of caution: if the settings
can't be determined with a fairly high reliability it won't touch
them, leaving you off no worse.  More often than not, however, it will
be able to make a reliable guess and so, in general, you should find
editing foreign files much more pleasurable than before.

@section Scope

@command{dtrt-indent} analyzes and adjusts two related settings: the indentation
offset and @code{indent-tabs-mode}.

The indentation offset is stored in a variable that depends on the
major mode.  The following major modes are supported:

@multitable @columnfractions .4 .6
@headitem Major Mode @tab Indentation Offset Variable
@item c-mode             @tab c-basic-offset
@item c++-mode           @tab c-basic-offset
@item java-mode          @tab c-basic-offset
@item jde-mode           @tab c-basic-offset
@item javascript-mode    @tab c-basic-offset
@item objc-mode          @tab c-basic-offset
@item php-mode           @tab c-basic-offset
@item perl-mode          @tab perl-indent-level
@item ruby-mode          @tab ruby-indent-level
@item ada-mode           @tab ada-indent
@item sh-mode            @tab sh-basic-offset
@item pascal-mode        @tab pascal-indent-level
@end multitable

Note that python-mode is not included in this list because it already
comes with indentation offset guessing.

@code{indent-tabs-mode} governs whether indentation uses ``hard'' tabs
(ASCII 9) or space characters only and is independent of the major
mode.

@section Limitations

@command{dtrt-indent} currently cannot guess the indentation style;
for instance, in Emacs C code can be formatted with a number of
different styles such as @code{k&r}, @code{stroustrup} or
@code{ellemtel}.  The effects of this setting goes beyond just the
indentation offset; @command{dtrt-indent} currently isn't capable of
detecting and adjusting this setting.

Also, when a file uses hard tabs @command{dtrt-indent} currently won't
make an attempt to figure out how many spaces per tab were used for
creating the file or whether irregular tab stops were used.


@node Usage
@chapter Usage

@section Basic Usage

@command{dtrt-indent} is a minor mode and can be used in two ways:

The recommended usage is to enable it globally by putting the
following in your @code{.emacs}:

@verbatim
(require 'dtrt-indent)
(dtrt-indent-mode 1)
@end verbatim

When enabled globally, every visited file that satisfies the
conditions outlined in the chapter on heuristics (*Note Heuristics::.)
will be analyzed and its settings adjusted if necessary.  Remember
that dtrt-indent's default settings are conservative so enabling it
globally should be safe.  (There are also facilities for informing you
when settings are changed, and for undoing any changes in case of a
wrong guess.)

If you don't trust dtrt-indent or generally dislike things happening
behind your back, however, you might want to leave it disabled by
default and only enable it when you notice that the file you're about
to edit requires adjustment.  In this case, put the following in your
@code{.emacs}:

@verbatim
(require 'dtrt-indent)
@end verbatim

Then, to attempt adjustment of the currently visited file, do

@verbatim
M-x dtrt-indent-mode
@end verbatim

Note that by enabling dtrt-indent only selectively, you will lose a
lot of its utility.  It is strongly recommended that you enable it
globally and tweak its settings, if necessary, should it not perform
as well as you'd like.

@section Undoing wrong guesses

Normally, dtrt-indent will do its job in the background without you
having to do anything.  You should only have to intervene if it makes
bad decisions; this should happen only rarely.  When it does happen,
you can use @samp{M-x dtrt-indent-undo} - this will revert any
settings that have been changed back to what they were before.

Should @command{dtrt-indent} guess wrong, you can also consider
fine-tuning it as described in the chapter on configuration.  *Note
Configuration::.

@section Excluding certain files

Usually, dtrt-indent should do the right thing for all files by
default, however you may want to keep it from touching the settings
for specific files.

As explained in the chapter on heuristics (*Note: Heuristics::.),
there are several ways in which you can achieve this:

@itemize @bullet

@item
By including the File Variable @code{dtrt-indent-mode: 0}, dtrt-indent
will be disabled for that file.  Note that this is the standard way of
disabling a minor mode for a given file.

@item
If you include a File Variable for the indentation offset (variable
name depends on major mode) and/or for @code{indent-tabs-mode},
dtrt-indent mode won't override the setting in question.

@item
You can set @code{dtrt-indent-accept-file-function} to a function
returning @code{nil} for the file in question.  Your function might
reject the file purely based on its file name or path, it could take a
closer look at the file contents before making a choice, or it could
consult some external data source.

@end itemize

@node Heuristics
@chapter Heuristics

This chapter describes the inner workings of dtrt-indent and how it
arrives at a conclusion on whether or not to change the indentation
settings, and to which value.

If you find the information in this chapter confusing, see the chapter
on diagnosis (*Note: Diagnosis::.) to learn how to get a more hands-on
understanding of the process.

@section Files Analyzed

@command{dtrt-indent} will analyze and potentially adjust settings
only for files that meet all of the following conditions:

@itemize @bullet

@item
When visiting the file, Emacs uses one of the supported major modes.
For example, files that are opened using ``fundamental-mode'' will be
ignored because dtrt-indent doesn't know how to analyze them.

@item
The file doesn't set the indentation offset variable corresponding to
the major mode as a File Variable.  (If it does, that's a good
indication that no guesswork is required.)

@item
The file doesn't specify @samp{dtrt-indent-mode: 0} as a File
Variable.  (If it does, it tells dtrt-indent that its services are not
desired for this file.)

@item
@code{dtrt-indent-accept-file-function} doesn't return nil for the
file's name.  (By default, it will accept all files, but you might
want to set it to ignore certain files.)

@end itemize

@subsection Configuration settings used at this stage
@code{dtrt-indent-accept-file-function}, @code{dtrt-indent-mode} (if
set as a File Variable)

@section Lines Analyzed

In order to limit performance degradation due to the analysis, only a
fixed number of lines will be analyzed.  If the size of the file is
less than this number of lines, the whole file will be analyzed;
otherwise, the given number of lines at the beginning of the file are
analyzed.

Certain lines are ignored during analysis:

@itemize @bullet

@item
Empty lines.

@item
Lines that are not indented (indentation offset 0).

@item
Lines that are the continuation of a multi-line comment or a
multi-line statement or expression.

@item
Lines that only contain a single character can be ignored; by default,
however, they are included.

@end itemize

If, after ignoring any lines that are not eligible, the amount of
relevant lines is smaller than a given threshold then the file is
treated as not fit for analysis and no guess will be made.

@subsection Configuration settings used at this stage
@code{dtrt-indent-min-relevant-lines},
@code{dtrt-indent-max-lines},
@code{dtrt-indent-ignore-single-chars-flag}

@section Histogram Generation

For the remaining lines - those eligible within the fixed range - a
histogram is generated.  The histogram informs @command{dtrt-indent}
about how many lines are indented with one space, how many with two
spaces, how many with three spaces, etc.

@section Offset Assessment

Using the histogram, @command{dtrt-indent} determines for each of the
potential indentation offsets (by default, 2 through 8) how many lines
are indented with a multiple of that offset.

Offsets for which the histogram doesn't contain enough distinct
indentations might be ignored; by default, however, a single
indentation per offset is accepted.

After this step, dtrt-indent has a map of probabilities for each of
the potential offsets.

@subsection Configuration settings used at this stage
@code{dtrt-indent-min-offset},
@code{dtrt-indent-max-offset},
@code{dtrt-indent-min-matching-indentations}

@section Offset Merging

As a next step, offsets that are a factor of another offset with
similar probability are discarded; this is necessary because in a file
that has been indented with, say, 4 spaces per level, 2 spaces per
level could otherwise be wrongly guessed.

@subsection Configuration settings used at this stage
@code{dtrt-indent-max-merge-deviation}

@section Final Evaluation

Finally, @command{dtrt-indent} looks at the highest probability of all
potential offsets; if that probablity is below a given threshold, the
guess is deemed unreliable and no settings are changed.

If the analysis yielded a best guess that exceeds the absolute
threshold, that guess is deemed reliable and the indentation setting will
be modified.

@subsection Configuration settings used at this stage
@code{dtrt-indent-min-quality},
@code{dtrt-indent-min-indent-superiority}

@section @code{indent-tabs-mode} Setting

For determining hard vs. soft tabs, @command{dtrt-indent} counts the
number of lines out of the eligible lines in the fixed segment that
are indented using hard tabs, and the number of lines indented using
spaces.  If either count is significantly higher than the other count,
@code{indent-tabs-mode} will be modified.

@subsection Configuration settings used at this stage
@code{dtrt-indent-min-soft-tab-superiority},
@code{dtrt-indent-min-hard-tab-superiority}

@node Diagnosis
@chapter Diagnosis

The previous chapter described the inner workings of dtrt-indent
(*Note Heuristics::.)  It is good to know what it's doing, but it is
even better to be able to see how it arrives at a particular
conclusion.  That's exactly what @code{dtrt-indent-diagnosis}
provides: call @samp{M-x dtrt-indent-diagnosis} while visiting the
buffer whose analysis you wish to scrutinize.

This will dump a diagnostic trace to the buffer
@code{*dtrt-indent-debug*}.  The trace should be self-explanatory,
assuming that you've read the chapter on Heuritics.  (*Note
Heuristics::.)  Reading and understanding the trace should go a long
way toward giving you an idea of which parameters need fine-tuning, if
any.

@section Eligible Line Highlighting

When reading the trace produced by @samp{M-x dtrt-indent-diagnosis}
you might spot an entry in the histogram and wonder ``Why would
dtrt-indent count these lines toward the histogram?''.  It is possible
that you found a bug in the way dtrt-indent determines which lines to
include in the histogram.  To make sure, you can use @samp{M-x
dtrt-indent-highlight} while visiting the buffer whose analysis
appears out of whack.  This will highlight any indentation that's been
used to calculate the histogram and allows you to doublecheck whether
or not you found a situation that could be improved.

Note that if you did find a situation where dtrt-indent's heuristics
leaves a lot to be desired, tweaking its parameters won't help; most
likely, @code{dtrt-indent-language-syntax-table} would need to be
amended.

@node Configuration
@chapter Configuration

dtrt-indent's configuration can be tweaked using the standard Emacs
customization facility; all settings can be found in the customization
group called ``dtrt-indent'' which is a member of both the ``files''
and ``convenience'' groups.

All settings come with detailed inline documentation; therefore, this
chapter aims to only give you a general overview of the available
settings.

There are two settings that govern dtrt-indent's basic behaviour; all
other parameters should be considered as fine-tuning and should only
be tweaked after reading the chapters on heuristics (*Note:
Heuristics::.) and diagnosis (*Note: Diagnosis::.)

The two basic settings are @code{dtrt-indent-verbosity} which
determines how eloquent dtrt-indent is in telling you about what it's
doing, and @code{dtrt-indent-require-confirmation-flag} which
determines whether or not your consent is required for any change.

The remaining settings are meant for fine-tuning the heuristics:

@itemize @bullet

@item
@code{dtrt-indent-min-relevant-lines} determines the minimum number of
non-empty, indented, eligible lines that are required for dtrt-indent
to attempt a guess

@item
@code{dtrt-indent-min-relevant-lines} gives the maximum number of
lines dtrt-indent will analyze, setting an upper bound on the amount
of time the analysis consumes

@item
@code{dtrt-indent-min-quality} and
@code{dtrt-indent-min-indent-superiority} are the primary variables
determining how conservative dtrt-indent is in accepting a guess of
indentation offset

@item
@code{dtrt-indent-min-soft-tab-superiority} and
@code{dtrt-indent-min-hard-tab-superiority} determine how conservative
dtrt-indent is in accepting a guess of the @code{indent-tabs-mode}
setting.

@item
@code{dtrt-indent-max-merge-deviation} indicates the threshold beyond
which an offset is treated as a sub-offset of a larger offset with
similar probability

@item
@code{dtrt-indent-ignore-single-chars-flag} tells dtrt-indent whether
or not to analyze lines containing only a single character

@item
@code{dtrt-indent-min-matching-indentations} is a secondary variable
to avoid false positives

@item
@code{dtrt-indent-min-offset} and @code{dtrt-indent-max-offset} give
the smallest and largest indentation offsets that can be guessed, and
should normally not be tinkered with

@item
@code{dtrt-indent-accept-file-function} can be used to exclude certain
files from analysis based on their path

@end itemize

@node Copying
@chapter Copying

dtrt-indent is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it
under the terms of the GNU General Public License as published by the
Free Software Foundation; either version 2, or (at your option) any
later version.

dtrt-indent is distributed in the hope that it will be useful, but
WITHOUT ANY WARRANTY; without even the implied warranty of
MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE.  See the GNU
General Public License for more details.

You should have received a copy of the GNU General Public License ;;
along with this software; see the file COPYING.  If not, write to ;;
the Free Software Foundation, Inc., 51 Franklin Street, Fifth ;;
Floor, Boston, MA 02110-1301 USA
